Territory: the Mountain Men - Walkthrough

Territory is a sandbox game.  There is no set procedure to follow to reach the goals. There is 
very little micro-management.

Move the mouse over the difficulty level icons to see the goal objectives for bronze, silver and 
gold awards.  Then click on the one you decide on.

You don't have to read the story unless you want some background on the era and the location.

Look at the HELP page.  Help is also available on the taskbar and in the hints.

The taskbar is displayed when you hit ENTER.  It contains buttons for Annual Report, Map, 
Travel, Trading Post, Quick Save, Quick Load and Pause.

Click NEW GAME.

You start in the Missouri River.  Ahead is the confluence of the MIssouri and Yellowstone.  Hit 
ENTER to open the taskbar and click MAP.
You'll see your little guy in that area.  

Click the pistol CONTINUE to return to the scene.  You can also use the keyboard M to toggle 
the map on/off.

The river on the left is the Yellowstone; on the right the Missouri.  Now is a good time to look 
at the hints.  Hit "H".

Bonuses
Ahead in the water you'll see a floating barrell.  Using the mouse to steer and the right mouse 
button to paddle, run into it and click "yes" to open up the bonus panel.  Read the info and read 
the help info at the bottom of the screen.  Accept the challenge.  You can always bring the help 
info for the bonus up again by hitting R on the keyboard.  As you try to complete the bonus 
tasks you will run into other events that sometimes make it hard to remember what you were 
setting out to do.

By accepting the bonus tasks you will learn certain elements of the game.  There are five in all.  
You will be offered the opportunity to take the second one when you finish the first, etc.

Establish a Trading Post
Paddle forward to the junction of the two rivers.  A screen will open that allows you to build a 
trading post. Click the arrowhead to the left of the sentence, "Establish Fort Union Trading Post".   
The post will appear on the left bank of the Missouri.  The Sioux village is on the right bank 
(north).

Docks
These allow you to go ashore if you ram them with your canoe.

Canoes
These will put you back on the water if you are on land.

Barrels and Buffalo Skulls
There are many other barrels floating along the rivers.  You have a choice of finding whether 
they contain something helpful or something perilous.  When you first play the game check 
them all out--the worst that can happen is a scalping which is not lethal in this game.  We've 
gotta keep you alive so you can become a rich fur tycoon.  The skulls on posts on the land are 
also chances for good or bad if you check them out by running into them.

Tribes
Finding tribes is essential to winning the game.  When you have located four of them you 
advance to Trader rank and then you can paddle faster and run on land by using both mouse 
buttons.  Reaching the higher ranks--Trailblazer, Explorer--you increase your profits on fur 
sales.
When a tribe is located you can subsequently use a shortcut to get there.  Just hit ENTER and 
TRAVEL, or keyboard shortcut "G".  A panel will offer you a list of the tribes.  Clicking on one 
that you have located will transport you instantly to that village--sort of a 19th Century Star 
Trek transporter beam action a little before its time.

Trading
The chief will offer to trade if they are not on the warpath.  Until you get better at the game, 
accept their offer of pelts for sale.  Then click on buy/sell button and you will see the trading 
panel.  On the left is what you have in your inventory.  In the middle is the price for that item.  
On the right is the tribes goods.  As the game progresses your settlers will gobble up all the 
food at the Fort Union Trading Post, so check the amount of food in your inventory and if it is 
low, buy from the tribe by clicking the arrow pointing to the left.  One click for each unit of 
food purchased.  If you have trade goods in your inventory sell as much as you can to the tribe 
until they run out of money.

Keeping up the food supply
When the game starts and you establish the Fort Union post you have only one person there.  
But settlers start coming and you will find it necessary to assign farmers, ranchers and 
fishermen to keep them fed.   You can do this by hitting ENTER and TRADING POST or by 
hitting M and clicking the trading post icon of Fort Union on the map. You can buy food from 
the tribes, or you can travel to St. Louis and buy it--ENTER/TRAVEL/GO TO ST. LOUIS.  

You will also at some point have to augment the food by going to St. Louis and hiring buffalo 
hunters and bakers.  They will increase production. Taking care of food production will allow 
the settlers to feed themselves but until you get them self-sufficient you will have to buy food.  
Failure to provide food for the settlers will bankrupt your company and end the game.

Warehouses 
You initially have warehouse space for 300 furs.  If you don't sell them and collections go over 
that amount they are often refused.  By assigning a logger and hiring a carpenter you can 
double the warehouse capacity to 600.

Selling Furs
Keep an eye on the amount of furs listed below the compass.  When you have enough to sell 
you can sell them by hitting ENTER and TRADING POST or by hitting M and clicking the trading 
post icon of Fort Union on the map.

Compass
If you get disoriented check the map for your approximate location and then use the compass to 
help find your way.


Going to St. Louis
To hire buffalo hunters, gunsmiths, bakers, carpenters and trappers you must go to St. Louis.  
Hit ENTER and TRAVEL and you will get the panel that allows you to pick St. Louis (at the top) as 
your destination.  Having a couple gunsmiths will keep a supply of trade guns in your 
inventory.

Trapper Cabins
The way to maximize fur production is to set up trapper cabins.  There are five places where 
you can do that. They require a trapper and $100.  When you set up cabins and posts you 
increase your total assets.  Your cash and assets are combined to reach your goal.  A trapper 
cabin will automatically contribute a number of pelts to the trading post every so often.

Wonders
As you explore you may run into Wonders that will get you an exploration bonus from the 
territorial governor.  For example, approaching the falls at the head of the Marias River past the 
Gros Vente village is one of those locations.

Hand to hand combat
Fighting grizzlies, wolves or hostiles with hatchet, knife, torch or a combination of those is done 
with only two controls.  Left mouse attacks.  Right mouse runs.  So move around if you're 
losing health and try attacking from a different angle or place.  You won't die if you fail.  You 
will probably lose some money or furs. If you win you may gain something valuable like a map 
to a gold mine.

Duck Hunt
You can augment the food supply by hunting ducks.  You have a rapid-firing cap and ball pistol 
so lay out a stream of balls ahead of them and shoot like crazy.  You'll get the hang of it.  You 
can practice the duck hunt on the Help page of the menu.

Cabin and Rockpile shoot-outs
In these situations where you are being fired on by voyageurs (Hudson Bay french trappers) or 
Braves you must hit the space bar to reload each time.  You can also hold the space bar down 
to stay ducked until you're ready to shoot.  There is no crosshair.  Just watch where your pistol 
ball goes and correct your aim next time you pop up.  
You can practice shooting on the Help page of the menu.

The Gold Mine
If you get both halves of the gold mine map, you will find a button above the taskbar that, when 
clicked, displays the detailed map.  "Roche Jaune" on the map is the French name for the 
Yellowstone River.  The map shows the way to a stone pyramid that triggers the mine level.

Rival trading Posts
You may come across a rival post.  If you burn it, it will cost that company $1000 and help you 
stay ahead of the competition which you must do to win the game.  The rival company may 
retaliate.

The pass over the mountains
There's only one way to find the pass and that's by rescuing the nubile young Indian maiden 
that's being attacked by a grizzly.  If you get whipped by the griz, look for the jug of Kickapoo 
Joy Juice that's on the ground near the girl.  That will give you the extra health you need.  If 
you never find the pass it's probably still possible to win the game.  But there are more tribes to 
the West and other opportunities.

Telescope and changing views
Hit V to change the view and use the middle mouse button to use the telescope.  When 
searching for a tribal village, use the telescope and look for smoke.

Annual Report
You can check your progress and stats any time by hitting ENTER for the taskbar and REPORT.

Save and Load
You can save your progress in the game on the taskbar.  It does not save it if you quit the 
game.  It is only an in-game save that can return you to a previous saved location during the 
session.

Pause
Also available on the taskbar or by hitting P.

Goal
Keep in mind that success depends on the amount of furs you buy from tribes and collect from 
the trading posts and trapper cabins.  Once you have discovered a tribe you can get there 
quickly to trade (teleport?) by using ENTER/TRAVEL/GO TO TRIBE

Ranks
You begin as a Trapper.  Finding three more tribes will make you a Trader and allow you to run 
on land and paddle faster in the canoe.  Trailblazer and Explorer ranks increase production 
from trapper cabins and the profit from furs.  Tycoon rank is achieved by making money 
beyond what's needed to win the game.

Known bugs
If the cursor disappears when the taskbar is showing, hit ENTER to bring it back. 
Sometimes ambient sounds interfere the very first time you play the game.  Just exit and start 
over. 
If you find other bugs please report them to bugs@atticgamez.com

One version of the game puts a shortcut in the startup file.  Go to programs/startup and delete 
it.

High Score

Your score, which is the total of cash, assets like trading posts and cabins, and the value of 
stockpiled furs, is shown at the end of the game along with the previous high score.



 



